Mighty year.
Welcome.
First welcome.
If you see it,
it should focus it.
Hmm.
See something genuine wrong.
All the lights sometimes.
Pardon?
All by
.
Hmm.
Yeah.
Sir.
It's pretty, pretty weird, isn't it?
Just come with me.
Okay.
Million roads.
So just checking that we have everyone here.
Okay.
Well, I think we will get started since you are with
us, unless you're expecting anyone else.
Um-
No, I've taken everyone out of ministry.
Yep.
Oh, yeah.
Well-
It's probably improved the-
Welcome to-
... the situation
... Vote Conservation this afternoon.
Look, we have an hour with you. So,
I think we will hand it over to you to open up with some opening remarks,
and then we will open it up for members to ask
questions.
Right.
So over to you, Minister.
Okay. «Toitu te marae, tea taane mahu, te mehine ahua nei.
Toitu te marae, tea tangaroa me hinemoana.
Toitu te taiao.» Thank you for offering me one hour
today to speak to issues relating to the conservation
responsibilities and portfolio.
I'm disappointed, I'd love to spend three and a half hours with Willie Jackson in
this room talking about the same topics as I did yesterday at the Maori Affairs
Select Committee. That was engaged and entertaining.
And I'm sure this session would be as well.
I have the great privilege to lead the conservation portfolio and be
the minister responsible for all things conservation,
but also have intersections with other ministers, MPs, the
broader public,
philanthropic and charitable organizations, businesses, concessionaires, and a
whole range of Kiwis, New Zealanders
who absolutely value this iconic and majestic place,
both on land, terrestrial, and also increasingly in the marine space.
And it's great to have the recent announcements about Te Orua
Rakihaua just off the coast of Timaru and Otago,
increasing the marine reser-reserve space by 50%
two weeks ago. That's a fantastic outcome and the sort of outcome and action for
nature that I'm absolutely committed to.
Biodiversity is a critical function of the conservation
portfolio and also our environment and our economy and our
way of life, connecting people to place, to our whakapapa, and
also to those things that are important to us as Kiwis.
And nature is one of the most unifying dimensions
and aspects of Aotearoa, New Zealand.
In fact, in various surveys,
more people will say that nature connects us
than any other issue,
which is really, really interesting.
But a healthy nature
can be the country's biggest asset.
It's worth tens of billions of dollars through our economy,
importantly reinforces our intergenerational responsibilities
for species, taonga species,
taonga places and whenua tapu and whenua tapu, our
turangawaewae.
As you'll be aware, I established four priorities for the portfolio.
One of them is targeting investment into high-value conservation outcomes,
like these guys.
Pukenui,
who we have been working very diligently around supporting down
in Rakiura through the work of ZIP
and the department staff, amongst others.
And we've seen an increase in the last year from, or
numbered, Pukenui from about 105 to about 160.
It's a great result, and part of that is through taking action, like 1080
drops. Some people don't like that, but it does help in killing
species that are not nice.
Pests.
Pests. Yes, that's right, pests. We've got to get rid of those.
So one, targeting investment into high conservation value outcomes, generating new
revenue and recalibrating costs, basically making money so we can reinvest into
biodiversity.
Strengthening relationships with iwi and hapū for better conservation outcomes.
I can wax lyrical about all the good things that we are doing as a conservation
department with iwi and hapū throughout the country, and actually some of the
challenges that we face, like councils who don't want to make decisions, are
very hard at times to get on with some things.
I'll mention in passing the cycle way on Ruapehu,
which we gave some $10 million support to
over the last year. It's taken about six months to actually get the consent sorted
with council. Outrageous. Especially when Ngati Tuhinga is actually leading that
project alongside Te Koorawa and Wainui Aradh.
And finally, fixing concession processes.
It's gone really well under the leadership and stewardship of Penny Nelson.
And we have reduced the number of outstanding concession applications
from about 1,400 to about 450.
And that's taken a diligent effort. It's taken a lot of resource.
But we need to make sure that we can activate the estate and actually enable
people to get out there by themselves.
And also,
where suitable, undertake their cultural, recreational,
business, and heritage activities.
That's my opening statement. Happy to take questions and yeah, let's.
Look, thank you very much, Minister.
We will go to Priyanka first
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Minister, this committee has
been told previously that DOC
has been under pressure for a wee while now.
We were told that they need about 150 million more,
that DOC spends an average of 365 million each year on
biodiversity, but that's only enough to protect 10% to
15% of species and ecosystem.
We've seen that they've had to cut 15% of their core
staff, 264 jobs, as a result of your government's
funding cuts. It's been reported that because of those funding
cuts, your government has made a funding swap using IVL to
the tune of 785 million
over the years from '24, '25 to '28,
'29. So, that goes to Crown coffers.
785 million extra that the Crown is saving by
advocating on their responsibility to protect biodiversity decline.
So, now we're seeing an additional about 58
million cut again from this budget.
Can you tell us, Minister, what gives here?
So, what species will you not protect as a result of this?
What further job losses?
Well, first and foremost, as you know,
employment and job matters are a matter for operations to-
Well, not if you keep cutting their funding
... to deliver on. And I won't take any of the exaggeration around advocating
responsibility either. That's really spurious, and actually completely
underwhelming. I think you're a better person than that, than to suggest that we're
advocating responsibility. And the comments that I will pass on
is this, that under a majority Labor government several
years ago, you did not increase-
That's right
... the amount of conservation funding to what we know others have said are
required-
That's not true. That's not true
... which was over $2 billion per annum.
That's simply untrue, Minister.
Never happened. Anyway.
That's right.
That is not a statement of truth.
Just to recalibrate some of your exaggeration.
Happy to.
Wait, can I ask a question?
It's not your question. It's my answer, not you.
It's a point of order.
No, it's my answer.
Please-
Go for your life
... Chloe. Yes.
Sorry. Yes. Point of order.
Yes.
I'm
seeking your guidance, Madam Chair.
When the minister states something that is demonstrably untrue-
Mm-hmm
... we can show you the funding increases that happened with the first Green
Minister of Conservation.
The largest funding increases.
We'd love to see-
Okay, just out of respect for the process, the
minister has been asked a question. He's answering the question.
But he's lying.
So let's let him finish.
Pardon me? What did you say?
Lying.
Finish, and-
Okay, okay. Hang on. She's calling me a liar.
Okay.
We both are.
Yeah.
So just note, this is-
Go for your life.
This is out of order. You have the ability to follow up with any
further questions, if you want to, outside of the scrutiny
process here, if you want to go and fact check anything.
But for the purpose of today, we will enable the minister to
finish his answer.
No, the estimate
around improving biodiversity on an enduring
basis to completely bring up
species from endangered and threatened level to a better place and a better space
is over 2 billion a year. No government in history, including the previous
government-
That's correct
... has ever done that. That is the absolute truth.
And I would like to see an effective and
efficient use of resources within the conservation portfolio, and that
is what the leadership of this organization has absolutely driven
towards. Yes, there are some cuts. Yes, there are some increases.
Things go up and down. But conservation, like a lot of other portfolios, has had to
undertake a variety of baseline reductions in
order to meet the overarching needs of a government that actually inhaled
a whole degree of fiscal terrorism by the opposition previously.
God. What-
So the next step, Bianca, did you have a supplementary?
Yes, I have supplementaries, Madam Chair.
Minister, in light of, or in the context
of the funding cuts,
over
successive years under your watch,
part of your priorities or one stated priority that you restated
today is to generate revenue.
Absolutely.
For DOC.
All about that.
Yeah. So, part of how you're doing that is through the Conservation Amendment Bill.
We've seen this map. I've got props too, like yours.
Yeah.
I note that you've not commented
publicly on this map that Forest & Bird has put out, which shows
just the amount of public conservation land that
can be sold off under your new bill.
And that also,
I guess the revenue generation also goes along with
your economic development focus that you've
brought in for DOC. How much money-- So you're going to sell off
part of the Tararuas, you can sell off Te Wahipounamu-
No, no. I'm not
... UNESCO World Heritage sites through your proposed bill.
No.
How much money are you planning to generate, or do you
estimate will be generated, as you sell off public conservation land?
Madam Chair.
Yes.
It is estimated.
There is no intention to generate huge swathes
of money from selling off land. But the MetService building,
which some of the members on my right-hand side might have been to, and has
very little, if any,
conservation value, sits at the top of Bolton Street, has no real value-
What are you talking about?
But DOC continues to hold onto it. Actually, we should sell that.
We should sell that-
How much money-
... in order to generate some money to invest in the very biodiversity that-
That your cuts stem from
... the opposition trumpets as the most important thing that we need to do.
Now,
there have been some absolutely mischievous intentions
and actions taken by various friends of my
colleagues right in order to trumpet and
mischievously-
How much money, Minister?
... move people's thinking into a space where it's
accused, the government's accused of selling off land.
But we don't have intention to sell off land for the purpose of
Are raising huge amounts of revenue. There is no intention at all.
But what we need to do is clarify the process in which land
disposals and transfers might take place.
But when you think about
a local purpose reserve of gravel in the middle of many
farms, it's currently in the DOC estate down on the west coast, that,
I think, should be subject to a process, public consultation, as
proposed in the-
Makes sense
... uh, Conservation Amendment Bill. That's right.
To go through a process that if actually it has little or no conservation
value, then DOC should be able-
Then replace it
... to go through that process, that clarified process, to sell it and then use
that money to reinvest in biodiversity.
Now, there have been some very scandalous accusations made, Madam Chair-
So can the minister finish please?
He's talking
... that I completely outrageously object to.
He's really waffly.
Okay. Um, just look, just members, uh, um, when you ask the minister a question,
we will allow the minister to finish his answer, and then you can have another
question.
Sure.
So, Priyanca.
Will the minister then confirm that land that was fundraised by
New Zealanders through the Nature Heritage Fund, that was then sold to DOC, will
not be sold off or exchanged in his proposal?
Well, the first thing
that I'd say is this, is that-
One more time
... DOC needs to generate more revenue in order to achieve the
type of biodiversity outcomes- That's right ... that we want and we all need.
Absolutely. And to look after the increasing CapEx and OpEx costs that go with
infrastructure.
I anticipate that most of the land that was acquired by way of the Nature Heritage
Fund actually had a high value and high conservation value.
Mm.
So I think it'd be very surprising to me if land that came through that process was
actually, uh, land that DOC had any intention to recommend
to the minister, uh, for disposal in the event that the Conservation Amendment
Bill actually does take place. But what I am not willing to accept, Madam Chair,
is that DOC makes $60 million a year from third-party
income. We know farmers and business people who make more than that.
Mm.
And DOC looks after 30% of all the land and makes $60 million
worth of third-party income, and I don't think that's good enough.
And that's why we say, actually, what are different ways that we
can generate revenue, whether or not that's car park charging, visitor, uh,
charging for international visitors to walk on some, uh, tracks
across the country, uh, charging concessionaires more if we
need to. We actually should think more creatively.
What I'm willing to do, Madam Chair, is actually think about different ways to
create revenue rather than just tax and debt.
But, um-
Thank you, Minister. Is that finished on interest?
No, just one more.
One more? Okay.
One more, sorry.
So that's, that's good news around the, um, NHF-
It's all good news
... land. No, it's not.
It is.
In terms of the threshold that you have set-
Go through a process
... for the piece... Can the minister let me finish my question?
Mm.
It goes both ways, Madam Chair.
Okay, Priyanca, carry on with your question.
Um, if your intention, Minister, is not to
allow up to 60% to just be sold willingly,
then why did you set the threshold at threatened
habitats of threatened species rather than at risk, which would
protect, would, would've protected a larger amount of public conservation
land?
But-
How do you justify that threshold?
Madam Chair, we're in a process for the Conservation Amendment Bill.
Mm. Mm.
If you have any good ideas, please bring them forward through the select committee
process.
Mm.
I'd like to see them, because I only see many here.
And, and the minister makes a good point.
Obviously, there is a bill, uh, before-
Does he, though?
No, but that there is a process-
No. No, he doesn't
... and obviously, the, the public have the ability to-
They already have, and he hasn't listened to them.
Uh, look, we're going to go to another question.
No, no.
Um, Grant Robertson.
It's going to go to select committee. You have supplement on it.
Pardon?
Supplement.
Uh, supplemen- okay, a supplementary over here-
Three minutes
... just before we go to a primary.
I have a primary.
Yeah.
Thank you.
We just want to keep on this.
On this one, yeah.
Okay. Yes. With Grant.
Thank you. Kia ora e te Minita. At the start of your
session, you talked about Toitū te Taiao.
Minister, could you firstly ask in relation to
these lands that you have put up to enable economic
opportunities or exchange and disposal,
when you have already had mandate and community voice
highlighting exactly that some of these lands are some of our most
protected. Why can't the minister just stick
to, and first and foremost, the Conservation
Department being about actual conservation,
especially when we are facing over 4,000
species threatened or at risk of
extinction. Why can the minister not stick to the
purpose of protecting land for future mokopuna?
I'll tell you what I stick to the purpose of, Madam Chair, is there's a whole bunch
of iwi out there that have gone through this settlement process, and they might not
have RFRs over some of the conservation land, but they'd really like to get hold of
it.
They'd really like to get-
Okay, so that's guaranteed
... hold of that land.
Good.
So there are processes through which we might be able to better
clarify the disposal of those lands, even when there's no RFR
on those lands, to iwi that actually want those lands back.
And what I think I'm hearing is-
Good. No, that's good
... actually, don't do that. Don't do that.
No, no, no.
Because what I've said all along-
All right. Can we have an answer to the question?
... is that there is no... No, I thought I was wanting to answer your question.
Madam. Yes, Minister.
Or are you making a point of order?
Please, please carry on, Minister.
No, no. So what I'm saying is, actually, there are bits and bob, like
that boys' borstal home up in Levin. You might remember- That's right ...
from that movie way back when in the, uh, 80s, Kingpin.
There are boys' borstal homes, asbestos ridden, lying
around the conservation estate, would, if you actually knew your history,
involved a whole bunch of land that was just shoved into the conservation- That's
right ... estate with no conservation value- That's right ... in the 1980s.
Now, that might not be history or herstory that you know about-
Will you please be quiet?
... but I know about.
Is that a, is that a guarantee then, Minister, that before any of the lands are
disposed, they will absolutely be put to a RFR
to iwi because the Greens will 100% insist on that and
support that?
Well, if you've read the Conservation Amendment Bill, maybe you'd know the answer
to that.
So is that a guarantee, Minister?
Why don't you read the bill and then submit on it?
Okay, so you're not willing to guarantee that.
Because it's in there already, and you haven't actually read the Conservation
Amendment Bill, because if you did, you'd know that.
So you're not willing to guarantee. Thank you.
Do you have another question? Um, Ko Wehi.
No, no, it's in the Conservation Amendment.
It's in the Conservation Amendment Bill.
But if you read it, you might find out
Chloe.
Research.
Okay. Minister, you are aware of these maps that have been produced?
No, I'm happy to help you, Bill.
And this one.
Okay, I hear you.
If members please would enable the question, please.
How is it that you get to where we're being so rude then?
We'll just have the question, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So this is Aotea Great Barrier Island and Little Barrier-
Absolutely
... my constituency of Auckland Central.
Can I just ask you firstly if the map that has been produced by Forest & Bird,
which includes these spaces, the red spaces being those which may be potentially
be available for selloff, the red being the enablement of economic development.
Is this a factual and accurate representation of the bill that you presented to
Parliament?
Well, I'm not in the, um, e- emails and, uh, workspace of Forest & Bird.
Others in this room might be, but I'm not, so I can't represent what Forest
& Bird, uh, has to say or what maps they put together.
I'm, I'm not asking what your vi-
Yeah
... I'm asking if you disagree, and on what basis you disagree with the maps
that represent the intention of the bill as you introduced to Parliament.
Is this a fair and accurate representation or not?
No. I haven't gone through all the Forest & Bird maps.
You might have, or you might have helped-
Then you-
... put them together, but I haven't
But how, how, h- does this echo
your understanding of what it is that you introduced to Parliament or not?
I, I haven't spent a lot of time looking at what happens in your, uh, uh-
Oh, so, sorry
... electorate out on those islands, uh, Chloe, but what I do know is that I've
been absolutely supportive of predator free initiatives, and couple of weeks ago-
No idea
... we actually announced $10 million in Auckland Central and out in the
Whangaparaoa islands-
No idea
... to help support the biodiversity that you trumpet.
Are you telling me, Minister, that you don't know the impact
on Aotea Great Barrier and Little Barrier from the Conservation Amendment
Bill that you introduced to Parliament?
No. What I'm, what I'm not prepared to do-
Mm
... is necessarily accept the map that you're given me from Forest & Bird.
So what do you dispute?
So, no-
No. We're putting together a Conservation Amendment Bill, Madam Chair.
Yeah.
Others can submit on it. That's the dem- democratic process.
But I'm not gonna buy into-
An occasional reader
... the scandalous and mischievous assertions that we are gonna sell off 60% of
this state, or up to 60% of the state.
Mm-hmm.
And I'd really enjoy-
Got your bill
... and appreciate if members opposite actually read the Conservation Amendment
Bill-
We have
... before, uh, exaggerating about its potential impacts.
Minister, Minister-
Look, we're gonna move on
... all I'm asking for-
Uh, because you've had the answer from the Minister.
Uh-
But he doesn't want to answer
... and we're just rehearsing the same territory.
Uh, look-
No answer
... Rachel's got a supplementary on this.
Yes.
And then we're gonna move on to another primary question.
Now, Minister, I do not have any props on me.
I'll give you one. I'll give you one.
But I'm-
There you go.
I'm gonna, I'm gonna refer to your props, because you do seem very excited by
them. And, uh, you, your, your point in this
discussion that we've just had seems to be,
in the round, are there's all this land of very low
conservation value-
Mm
... and we should be able to, uh, reallocate it and do better for
conservation. I think that has been the argument that you've been
making.
And so what we're asking for on this side is
some comfort that that will be the only type of
land that is ever sold.
Mm.
And I note that you have reduced
the funding that is going to the ongoing stewardship land
reclassification program. So I have been heckling in
this little encounter about, well, reclassify it.
Mm.
If that, if you're saying, with your props, that there is
land that should not be used for conservation purposes, or, and
I'll take you at your word that it's...
I'm not gonna argue, I'm not arguing about that.
But why don't you reclassify that land,
and should we be worried that in fact funding is going from that
reclassification work? Because I understand the history of the DOC estate-
Mm
... Minister. I understand that a lot of the
land was pushed into DOC-
Mm
... for, for no,
no huge conservation reasons. I'm not arguing about that,
but that is why the reclassification is important, because some of the land
is a very high biodiversity value.
That's right.
And some of it is car parks.
Okay, let me unpack and decompose your question.
Comfort.
I suspect that you've actually read the Conservation Amendment Bill.
And if you have, you would've seen that there's 40% of the land, uh, that is
not, uh, in, in the space of any potential,
um, disposal, because it's of a n- of a certain classification.
Yeah.
Then across the other 60%, there are bits and bobs-
Mm
... that actually should be sold or got rid
of in order to
reinvest in biodiversity, like this place.
But it's-
We are not talking about big blocks of land or big swa- swathes of land.
But if we say nothing can ever be sold, it all must
stay in the conservation estate, you inhale a bunch of
liabilities, you inhale a bunch of stuff that has no or
limited conservation value, which you know the history around.
So the 40%, and you're saying that some of the 40% is bits and
bobs-
No
... of-
No, no, no, no
No, no.
The 60% is-
So we're saying that some-
Mm
... of the 60%-
60, that bill
... is bits and bobs.
Mm-hmm.
Okay? Some of the 60% is bits and bobs.
But then you also have-
Look, look at this
Is-
This has no conservation value
Mate, that's one building, not 60%.
It is-
There are many bits and bobs around the place where there are sections between
houses in Ōhākune on Arawa Street.
Yeah.
And are you gonna reclassify-
Gravel reserves out in the middle of farms on the west coast
... the bits and bobs?
There's places all over the place, okay?
Are you reclassifying them? And, and if so, how are you going to do that-
No, we're not going through any more reclassification processes in this term.
Oh.
We've already done one, and you j- as you know-
And no guarantees
... it's already, uh, um-
No comfort
... subject to something that we can't talk about today, because it's in,
in court on some of the titles that were, uh,
reclassified. Okay? So
we're not going into any more reclassification in this term.
But-
In the future, whatever future government decides, okay, away you go.
So the comfort-
But, but here, here's, here's something that I'm gonna really square you up on,
all, all of you.
You are okay with bits and, of national
park being given- Legal response, legal
personality and effectively coming out of DOC.
That's right.
You're okay with lands coming out of DOC and being
transferred across the country, like up in Ngati
Kuri-
Back to where it was stolen from.
Whirirau.
Yeah.
Well-
Part out
... thank you.
Back to iwi and hapu.
River, forest, and a mountain.
Okay. But-
Just all used for conservation
... but, but-
Let the minister finish
... if you're not prepared-
Let the minister finish her question
... for us to clarify what a disposal process should be
in relation to lands-
It's all the same
... that may actually end up-
Just
... with iwi that do not have an RFR
... spell it out
... I find that hugely hypocritical.
Well, I'm just being put-
Thank you. Okay, look, we are going to move on.
No, no we're not. I've just been put on the spot.
Rachel, you can have one more question, Rachel.
One more question on this and then we're going to move on. Okay?
But there is a very clear point here, where we're just talking
about, I think you were referring to things like the Whanganui River
being given personhood.
River and beach and
And that goes to a conservation purpose.
Yeah.
So what I have asked you for is some
comfort that the bit, things that you describe as bits and
bobs-
Cut it out
... that are not going to be reclassified will indeed
be just what all of us around the room would consider to
be a bits and bobs.
Section B.
Well, that's what we're going through at the moment, the proposal to
clarify disposal and transfer processes. That's all it is.
Now, we have to get through a whole bunch of select committee and a whole bunch of
readings and other things as well before we actually land that.
And it may be through that process we say, "Well, there's other areas actually,
we should join them up with the 40%." That may be where it-
Is that what you want?
But that may be where it is.
But is that, can you... I don't think it's a hard question for you
to give me some comfort to say-
Right
... "Rachel,
my idea as the minister is
for the only disposal to be of things of low or
no conservation value."
Mm.
Well, no. Hang on, hang on. What we've said is, we've already had a look at this
through the fast track approvals process where there can be exchanges for net-
Sure
... conservation value.
Right
Parliament decided that. Parliament approved that.
Well, you know what I think
So, uh, no, no, Parliament approved it, despite the efforts of others to take it
into the wee hours of the morning. We approved it as a Parliament.
Now, what I'm saying is-
You've got to return
... sometimes there might be
some examples where actually you can have net exchanges.
That can happen.
Okay. Yeah, so putting net exchanges-
But what we're not doing-
... to one side
... is selling off huge swathes of land.
And despite the efforts of people who are in
the Olympic championships for exaggeration.
Okay. So you just said you're not going to sell-
Look, one more question, Rachel-
Oh, we're just parroting
... because you're just asking the same question, you're getting the same answer.
Well, I'm not. I keep getting quite different answers and a lot of hyperbole.
Mm.
Uh, so I've just heard the minister say right at the end there that he's not
going to sell off great swathes of land.
No.
That's right.
I've said that. I've said that so many times to you and your mates.
You've said that many times.
Exactly.
I've said bits and bobs.
Yeah.
He's not going to give me comfort about the bits and bobs because there might be
some good examples where you can do it in exchange for a net
benefit.
Mm.
So I asked-
Well, there might be bits and bobs you can exchange for net benefit.
There might be
Okay. Look, I think he's answered your question.
Um, Chloe, one more on this and then we're going to move on.
And it's been-
Minister, you keep pointing to specific instances
of buildings.
It's not just buildings.
If I may finish my question, Minister.
Of these, sure, of these so-called bits and bobs, but can you
understand the concern that so many New Zealanders have when what
you're actually talking about is potentially enabling the sell-off and/or the
disposal and/or economic activity on potentially
60% of the current conservation estate?
Can you understand that concern?
Just unpack it a bit, Chloe. Economic activity takes place on a whole
range of areas, including the 40% that's of very seriously high
conservation value. That happens.
Guided walks take place right in the heart, and that's economic activity.
Mm.
Okay? The Milford Sound Terminal, um, is on
Fiordland, even though the
wharf itself is actually off that.
Do you want to take my question in good faith, Minister?
Just let her answer.
There's economic activity all over the place.
So what we're saying is actually, let's just clarify what
the disposal process is. There's an RFR there, and if you've read it, you'd
see that the RFR's hardwired into the proposed process for
disposal and transfer. That's what it is.
We are not selling off 60% of the conservation estate.
That's not going to happen.
Mm.
Okay? There's a process by which we might tune it up, and maybe
your map will change as a result. But what I'm not going to live in
is this spurious claim that Mr. Portock is trying to sell off 60% of the
estate. That's highly ridiculous and fantasy land.
Well, then-
It's highly ridiculous.
Look, I think the minister has made himself quite clear
in that area.
Got me.
And, uh, we've seen a lot of repetition-
Phrasing
... so we are going to move on, uh, to
another topic. Um, I'm going to hand over to Grant McCallum for a question.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Um, Minister, recently you, um,
announced, um, moving on to a completely different topic area, in the South
Island, when it was all announced about wilding pines-
Oh, yes
... and the work you're going to do in that space.
And so what have you, what's been announced and what are you spending,
what's your goal and why is it so important?
Well, wilding pines is the biggest weed in the country.
Very crazy.
It's absolutely outrageous. No matter where you go, whether or not you go to the
largest podocarp forest in the world, it's called, uh,
Yeah
... Ngāpuna e Turoa peretu, also known as Rangitoto.
We had to get rid of some of them up there recently.
Uh, or the Molesworth Farm station.
Mm.
You know, taking seed sourcing from the Branch Letham, or indeed the Mackenzie
Basin, uh, to Manawatu. You know, wilding pines is just out of control, and
it compromises our environment, it compromises tourism, it compromises
water that go in the dams that feed the electricity.
They actually keep the scones warm in ovens in New Market
So what we have to do is deal to it, and I've had a lot of
advocacy-
Mm
... and a lot of leadership from Minister Hoggard,
and a severe,
what I call it, recalibration from the Prime Minister-
Mm-hmm
... about the need to deal with this weed.
And so the Department of Conservation, alongside Minister Hoggard, MVI,
Todd McClay, and the Prime Minister, recently announced $109 million
to the removal and eradication of wilding pines and conifers and
other nasties like sagu and other things that are down that way.
I just wanted to acknowledge Stuart Smith and particularly Perry Nelson for their
dexterity and flexibility in contributing $39 million
out of $109 million-
Not pulling out the trees
... from the Department of Conservation to deal to this nasty, noxious
weed.
Thank you, minister.
I might jump in and ask a question here because I'm quite interested in predator
free and the obviously work that's going on in the space, a lot
of the technological advancements that we're seeing in the tracking and
obviously DOC leading a lot of that work,
funding going into certain areas.
Just wondering whether you could elaborate a little further
on the areas of focus in the predator free space.
Well, if wilding pines are the biggest weed in the country, predators and
pests are actually the biggest
axis. At the axis of predator evil,
that is chasing down our biodiversity.
And so we have a very high level
of commitment
to improving biodiversity and eliminating predators throughout the
country. We've added feral cats to the Predator Free 2050 list.
We've announced Predator Free Wellington and some support alongside pest free
Mirimar, Kapiti Kiwi-
Yeah
... and
Zealandia.
We announced the Predator Free Auckland, $10 million a couple of weeks ago in
relation to the Whangaparaoa Peninsula, a point shape of the Tamaki River, right in
the heart of Miss Swarbrick's electorate, actually,
and throughout the islands that are already predator free.
We collaborate with the likes of Nix Foundation and others in predator free
activities in Ōkārito on South Westland and ZIP down in Rakiura.
There's a huge effort, and we've put some IVL money into Predator Free Mokopuka,
which is the Auckland Islands and Sub-Antarctics, alongside the International
Oceans
Collaboration that is underway to make islands like Rakiura predator free.
And of course, dropping 10 ADAs and getting rid of feral cats has helped
enable the return of more pukenekohe and other birds.
We just recently announced a $14.1
million predator free initiative, where you'll see a whole bunch of investment in
the South Island over the coming 12 to 24 months to deal
with predators throughout the place.
There are also other things called ungulates that are unhelpful, like goats and
deer.
Mm.
And there's a variety of initiatives funded both out of Baseline and
IVL in places like the Te Kai Manawa, the Kaweka Up, actually where you're
located, Madam Chair-
Mm
... to get rid of these pests that are also causing harm
to our biodiversity. So the Predator Free initiative is also reaching to
technology. There's some work undertaken within the Department of Conservation
around people, often in locked rooms with no windows, trying to create traps
and IT equipment to track down rats and mice.
There's also some work
with our partners, or our partners are undertaking work offshore about how we can
better attack predators from a genetic and other perspective.
Those are the sorts of things that ultimately we have to think about in the future,
using tools that are suitable to eliminate these
guys that are trying to wipe out our biodiversity. They're not cool.
Mm.
There's partnerships all over the place too, whether or not it's
places like Manaaki Ūruwhiti and
Raukuuma Pae Maunga. We provided some support for them to continue their
outstanding work.
The Predator Free initiatives around Te Pae o Rākaiho to Banks
Peninsula. There's a whole range of people out there in urban
and rural and other areas that are doing
phenomenal work to eliminate predators, and part of our job is actually just to
partner with them and support them in what they're doing, rather than trying to be
the be all and the end all of an omniscient DOC that we are
not.
Which leads me on to my next question, actually,
because you talk about partnerships.
The other day, I was with a lot of iwi groups at the Umahu Marae, looking at the
conservation work that's going on in the Ruhine ranges there and
the predator free work. And so how do you see those kind of partnerships
working into the future
to kind of get better outcomes?
Well, one of the great things that people in this space often do is convene
together to find out what are the better options to attack certain types of
predators, whether or not it's feral cats or rats, possums, and
mussel beds and rodents. There's actually quite a few rodents in Ponsonby.
There was a news story a couple of weeks ago.
So I find that there's a lot of exchange between those organizations
and staff at DOC about how we can introduce or
ensure best practice across regions
and to reduce any of the inefficiencies or delivery issues that people
have and organizations have, not just against contracts, but against their own
aspirations to eliminate these guys and actually get on with the job
of reinstating biodiversity. Now, one area which I am enthusiastic about,
of course, is the QEII Trust and all the good work Alan
Livingston, rest in peace, and others have done over the past few years, to
establish
QEII covenants across private land that DOC can support with
fencing and trapping and other support.
Don't get me started on the 8220s. So the
work that private landowners are doing can often dovetail as
ecological corridors or as adjacencies to conservation
land, to eliminate predators. And of course, we
provided some additional IVL funding to them
a couple of years ago and made that announcement down at the Rakaia River
So it's a whole of country effort,
and I hope that we generate the same amount of
enthusiasm as some important rugby fixtures,
one of which is this week. We generate the same amount of enthusiasm and excitement
amongst other New Zealanders around Predator Free.
And I said go up to Capital Kiwi in the school up there at
Makara. Those young people were out there catching possums and
catching feral cats to ensure that the kiwi out there survive.
That's the type of initiative that, when teamed up with funding,
and with good science, can have a real impact on biodiversity.
Thank you, Minister. And a supplementary from Rachel.
Yes. Look, I want to agree with the minister that
ungulates and other pests are not cool guys.
Good to start a question with something with some agreement.
A positive question.
So on that-
Spoken out.
Yes. On that,
this budget discontinues predator control across roughly
155,000 hectares of public conservation land.
Which areas are being abandoned, and which species in
them,
in terms of our biodiversity, are now at greater risk?
Not the ungulate species.
Yeah.
Can I just ask for that question again?
I've just got this-
No, just-
It's a discontinuing of predator control of about 155-
Yes, yes
... 100,000 hectares-
Yes
... of public conservation land.
There has been some reduction in the funding that's been allocated to predator
control. That's in the budget materials. Is it?
Yes. Yes, it is in the budget materials.
Yeah, 5.8 or something like that.
That's why I'm asking about it.
Yeah, that's what I'm responsible for.
So acknowledge that, and in the same breath, also acknowledge some
reinvestment into predator control, whether or not that's through the IVL or other
initiatives. As I said, we've taken some baseline cuts.
Some of those have reached into items like predator control.
And-
And so where are these areas, and what is the biodiversity
that could be affected by the predators not being-
Oh, Penny will answer that. There are specific areas, but Penny's across those
areas.
So we haven't worked out the areas yet.
We'll use Bioinvest to do that. But what we're
thrilled about is with the IVL investment that's just come
through to help us deal with the mast year that we're dealing with in the South
Island, will help counter what's come out through the budget this
year.
Okay, so not sure. And is there a reliance on sheep?
Is that one of the reasons
for the cut?
Sheep? No.
Did you say sheep?
Yeah.
Sheep.
I've heard a lot of government members talk about-
Grazing
... the usefulness of sheep for grazing dockland.
Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. All about sheep.
Okay.
And making sure in the right places and the right location-
That's right
... that grazing can take place.
Mm.
Absolutely. And sometimes they can have an impact on-
Eat the weeds
... uh-
Yeah
... little wildings.
That's right, little wildings.
Little wildings. But it's only a certain height.
They might eat them out, but once it gets to a certain height, the sheep can't eat
them. So we are keen on activating,
in the right place, grazing, and we continue to do that, and we've done that for
decades.
Mm.
Thank you. Cameron.
Thank you, Chair. Yeah.
Acknowledging, Minister, some spending that's been done for pilots
around
controlling of deer in the Rangitikei, Wairarapa, and North
Canterbury.
Yes, absolutely.
So just wanted to hear what you're expecting to see from that.
And I just have a follow-up question, which I'll ask now, so if I may do this one.
What I'd like to see or what I'd like to hear is less phone calls from the
landowners throughout the upper Rangitikei district, who seem to have my number and
call me about all the deer coming off the Kaingo and the Kawika Ranges all the
time. Now, that's not cool.
No.
As I said, they might be tasty for the back steaks, but they are not cool when they
come and eat out all the grass on private property owners.
And that's why I've been very,
what's the word, collaborative with Penny to make sure we get some
action in removal or elimination of deer
in certain places. Now, it's hard to catch all the deer, but in
Northland,
I understand that there might only be one deer left in the Awhatu
Forest.
That's correct.
And his name's Grant.
His name's Grant. So
...
Oh. Yeah, I was going to ask a slightly different question.
Big stag, 16 points. But importantly, if we can
eliminate deer from some areas, we're going to get a lot more-
Does that deer believe in the circular economy?
... return on trees and biodiversity.
Yeah, I think that's a fair point, Minister, in making sure that
people who care about the conservation, the hunting opportunities, and farmers are
working hand in hand, not seeing each other as enemies in this.
But the question I was hoping to get to is, with this trial program,
is there any new technology that's being trialed?
Is there anything about
using...
Or is there any studies looking at what the long-term
outcomes using brodifacoum have caused for the ability to recover deer?
Is there anything that's looking to use the meat there that we-
I just wanted to ask my staff about that particular issue, especially with
brodifacoum, which has some very serious implications. Oh, Ben.
Oh, Ben.
Ben.
Here he is.
Kia ora.
Yeah.
Biodiversity National Programs director at DOC.
The program you're talking about is a MPI lead program that's
seeking to
identify three catchments, looking at how those
communities can solve their top deer problems at their place.
And so they're in the early stages of setting those up.
The idea is to learn over the next six months around what's the nature of
the support that's required to get those outcomes.
So the trick on all of this, though, is that deer are so mobile,
and they work right across land tenures.
So if you took the Ruahine Forest Park as an example, a nice
skinny
forest park, there's 157 property boundaries, and deer
are definitely moving between those.
So I think as part of all of the work where we're looking and where we're also
looking to collaborate with the hunting sector
to get better outcomes at places, we're looking at things
to actually remove some of the barriers and to trial some new tools.
So people are looking at exploring deer trapping as a tool.
There is work that MPI is leading through their food safety ...
programmed to look at how they may address some of the barriers,
as you've mentioned, that brodifacoum or other toxins may use on meat
recovery. So there's quite a lot of exploring going on at the moment.
Yeah. But it's all MPI, not from DOC at all. Is that what I'm hearing?
So the program on the catchments, the three trial catchments,
is an MPI-led program.
Yeah. It's an MPI program.
Brodifacoum settings are entirely Food Safety Authority in
relation to meat recovery.
Well, what I'll say is this.
Yeah, it's DOC.
The explosion of deer numbers is a problem in many places around the country.
There's been huge efforts, particularly in Northland and Coromandel, to basically
eliminate and eradicate deer, and it's been very good.
I wanted to acknowledge Jeff, former Northland Regional Council, Jeff Crawford, and
his work, but there are others out there.
But when you have 1,000 deer come onto one farm and be shot in a week-
Of course
... that is outrageous.
But brodifacoum's been used for a long time, but
Well, the brodi can be used, but it has some pretty nasty
consequences-
That's right
... as well, especially if it gets in the water.
So we've got to be really, really careful around that.
We do think that interaction between the hunting community,
farmers,
philanthropists, and charitable organizations like Nokumara Pai Maunga doing a
wonderful job up on the East Coast and removing deer, Caleb Wharepapa and others
up that way.
And iwi groups, particularly around Ruahine, Kāpuka,
Kaimanawa, and through Tūwharetoa, is very, very important
that those groups work together and people aren't off on just their own
deer hunt.
So that's something that I'm pretty encouraging of.
And a final point is that I know that there's some
pretty
important tourism opportunities in the hunting space as well that
sometimes intersect with these matters, but we're talking about an
infestation of deer in some locations.
Mm.
We have to really get those numbers managed,
and ultimately it often comes down to shooting irons.
I think that's a fair point. Can I just get one clear?
Yes.
Penny, is DOC looking at the use of brodifacoum in any-
No
... for the long-term issues that it causes to waterways,
food chains?
No.
Okay. You're holding
Absolutely, absolutely not
... no. Okay.
No, that's not our game.
Got a clear answer.
That's cool. Got a clear answer.
Absolutely not.
Thank you. Look, we're now going to move to Priyanka for a new
line of questioning.
Cool.
Thank you.
I'm keen to get some clarity around IVL
funding.
Yes.
And want to start by just getting clarity on some
figures.
Last year, this committee was told that
off the 190 million forecast revenue at the time-
Is it
... and that it would grow to 229 million from next year, so
presumably this year, that DOC gets 55 million a year for
new projects.
Mm.
Tourism gets 35 million a year.
And any revenue beyond that 90 million would be split
50/50 between the two, conservation and tourism, less the
administrative costs.
I see that the '24, '25 annual report
has very recently been put up on the MB
website, and I just want to clarify figures there.
So it says that the total
funding as of June last year allocated to future years is
271.94 million across both tourism and
conservation,
and that the conservation portion of that will be
123.944 million over the
next four financial years, and
124.309 million for
tourism over the next four years. So that then equates to
30.9 per year for the conservation portion of
that. Is that correct?
Look, I don't know what that said-
Mm
... it's from MB. I'd have to have a look at it.
But the basic story is the IVL was set up, there was a split that was at
35 bucks. It was envisaged it'd be 400 million over five years.
It didn't happen that way because of COVID and other things that hit the tourism
numbers.
When we came in, we saw those numbers.
Things were coming up in terms of the total number.
Okay. Well, I'll just-
But assuming there's enough IVL generated,
the split is 55 to conservation and 35
to tourism. So if there's 90 million that comes up, that's how
it's split. If it's 190, that's how it's split.
And anything additional, there'll be a baseline swap.
Okay? So if it's-
Yeah
... 110 instead of 90, then 10 would go to DOC as
a baseline swap and 10 to tourism as a baseline swap.
Yep.
Okay, so that's how it rolls. Now, I don't know exactly what your numbers are, but
in the event that-
Numbers
... that we go over that 90, then it gets split up again into 50/50.
But before that, it's 55 to DOC and 35 to tourism.
And in the DOC portion, we split it up on a 60/40
basis, so 60 to biodiversity and
40%-
Yep
... percent to essentially-
Just to-
...
visitor infrastructure and infrastructure, so it's like tracks and huts and things
like that. Are we doing the Ōtorohangī huts out of IVL, or is it just
a baseline?
We've done some of the Back Country Hut Trust-
Mm.
Uh, collaboration has been u- we've used-
Yeah, that's.
What's that?
Yeah, they got IVL. Yeah.
Who? Ōtorohangī?
Uh, for... No.
Oh, no, the Back Country Hut Trust to fix up some of the huts.
Oh, yes.
We gave them some money out of IVL as an example. That's an example.
That's not a biodiversity spend, that's a infrastructure spend.
Okay. So the 55 million and 35 million don't change
even as the IVL funding increases.
No. No.
Okay. It's just the basic-
That's what the baseline is, unless a future government and a future budget-
Mm
... takes a different view. So that's what it is.
Yeah, yeah. No, I get that. So, it would be good to get a sense of whether these
figures are correct, perhaps from the, um-
Yeah. I'll check that out.
Whomever you say.
Can we get that offline and sort that for you?
Yeah, yeah. That's all good.
I can follow up on some.
It's on MB's website.
And some of those numbers, where it goes up further, is because you'll have
something that you get in one year, the work's not completed-
Yeah, you got it
... and then you forward through to the following year.
Yeah.
But as the minister laid out, that's how it works.
Okay
In terms of the basic components of it.
Yeah. And are decisions around spend made
by joint IVL ministers, or does each minister make decisions around
each of your spends?
Basically, yeah. The basic way I'd describe this is that there is a plan that's put
forward between us as Minister of Finance, the Minister of Tourism, and the
Minister of Conservation, and we lay in the plan about how the split-
Okay
... the tourism numbers and the DOC numbers are spent.
That's basically how it rolls.
So can you
justify,
or give us an explanation, or
clarify that $41.9 million
that was spent on tourism marketing, despite that
having gone out and people saying they weren't happy with money that was meant to
go towards conservation or dealing with the conservation impacts
of increased tourism going on marketing?
We don't spend money on tourism marketing out of conservation.
That might have come out of the tourism IVL.
Yeah, but that's still the IVL funding that your government's made decisions
around.
But that's not the conservation portfolio.
I'm not responsible for the tourism IVL funding.
I'm only responsible for the conservation IVL funding.
Okay. Then how is it that the Mayor of Queenstown is saying, different
question,
is saying, given that the IVL funding was set up to deal with the
impacts on conservation of increased tourism, that Queenstown,
for example, has seen no IVL investment despite their
tourism levels having increased to pre-COVID levels?
Well, I think that's
the tourism area or the area around Queenstown has
received serious IVL funding, whether or not it's down the Milford Sound channel,
the toilets are toilets of national significance up at Hanipifi
Wai. Or the serious investment in cleaning up the wharf and the
landfill down at Little Tahiti and Piopiotahi,
or some of the work that's been done over the way, of course, back towards
McKenzie. There's been serious IVL funding spent in that area.
If you're saying that the conservation IVL
portion should be used to pay for expensive roundabouts in Queenstown-
No, no, I'm saying that-
Or maybe something else, that's not our space
... it's sewage that they were talking about, actually-
So-
...
into the waterways
... well, we are spending-
Which is a conservation issue
... we are spending money on toilets in that area.
Those are the ones up at Hanipifi Wai, Lake Marian.
You know where it is.
Beautiful spot.
Beautiful place, actually.
Yeah.
Spectacular.
So I don't know, like-
We get there often
... so Queenstown's got its own kaupapa going on, and particularly around
the urban sewage wastewater, and I think that's part of the whole
mashup. Or maybe that's not the right way to describe it-
Last item on this. Okay
... with regional deals.
Yeah. Just one last question, Chair.
How do you determine the value
for money out of IVL spending on the conservation projects that you have
jurisdiction over?
Okay, so what we do, if we get some additional money like that or
like the IVL, or if some other money turns up out of somewhere, there's a
tool called the BioInvest tool that helps inform the decision making.
That says, "Hey, this is the best place in terms of the..." I don't know how many
projects. Are there 250?
Well, there's a bunch of projects, but there's 13,000 different things.
13,000 different things we could spend on.
There's a BioInvest tool that was built over several years, and
essentially it would say, "If you got another 100 million, where would you
best get a lift in biodiversity from that additional money?
What are the ecosystem projects or other projects you might want to invest in?" And
that helps inform the decision making.
It's not the only factor, but it definitely is a major contributor to the decision
making.
Is that something that will be shared publicly in terms of the quantum of-
Well, I think what we'll do is, for this committee, we'll have a separate session,
and we'll bring it and we'll show it.
Oh, we've had one.
Yeah. I don't know if Francine was part of that, though.
No.
We've had one.
We've had one on the BioInvest tool.
I'm talking about the impacts of that spend or the outcomes
across biodiversity protection and restoration that have
been realized through the IVL funding.
Oh, okay. Yeah. Well, no, we could probably do some more
intrepid reporting on it.
So we've started doing that.
Yeah.
So we now report regularly to the minister on what's
being achieved through IVL.
Mm-hmm.
So for future committees like that, we could very easily give you more information
on that.
I'll give you an example. This is a good one that I know about, but a lot of people
won't. Cathedral Cove basically blew its guts out
in Cyclone Gabrielle. It took nearly two years to fix,
but we used some IVL to go and fix Cathedral Cove with some steps and some
brand-new track, and also to help with
rehabilitating
some of the walkways and paths to get to Motohere, which is at the bottom of
Cathedral Cove. We used some of the IVL money for that.
Now, what we could do is instead of having a couple of sentences, we could have a
few more, or come to this committee and say, "This is how the IVL was spent.
This is what's happened."
Okay? Maybe that's a good start.
Look, thank you. We're going to move to a couple of other primary questions. Grant?
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Biodiversity is obviously a hot topic.
How important is the QEII Trust in that space and the
funding you put into that to help with biodiversity around the country?
Well, I think I set it up. There's Aotearoa New Zealand biodiversity strategy.
Okay? And that falls within the rubric of the conventional of
biodiversity, and that basically
sets up the framework in which we are engaging on biodiversity issues.
Now, the QEII, that's about 200,000 acres?
Hectares, yeah.
Hectares. Hectares of privately owned land with a covenant that
has biodiversity and other important things happening on it.
That's 200,000. The DOC estate is 8.7 million hectares.
But the good thing about the QEII is there's bang for buck, so if we put in a
dollar, there's government, successive governments, farmers and private
landowners might put in $5 to $7-
That's right
... of additional investment. So in terms of bang for buck, that is massive.
And you think about some of the QEII covenants in quite
inspirational and
serene places like Coronet Peak Station, the largest
QEII covenant, Muk Lean
Shania Twain's ex-husband, who-
Mm
... contributed 21,000 hectares of land into QEII covenant.
Mm.
Was that a-
Preserved-
Overseas investment requirement?
By the time. That is a massive contribution to-
Yeah. Yeah
... conservation.
Yeah.
So, you know, that's the sort of-
Regulated
... upside that we have. Pardon?
It was regulated, though, wasn't it? That was an overseas investment requirement.
Yeah, but that's what, that's what happens.
It all counts. It all counts.
And it is a good thing.
It all counts, and you know what-
I'm not saying, I'm not saying QEII's not a good thing.
Well, I'm not saying you're not still the one. You are.
But,
that is the sort of contribution that QEII can make-
Mm
... to the overarching environmental and conservation and
kaitiakitanga responsibility. It's not the only way, but it is a bang
for buck way. But there's a whole bunch of people out there,
private landowners who do that, but also people who are working on their estate.
And we've got to be careful
as DOC to make... Oh, sorry, there's one other place, Tarahu in the
Whenuara, which has something of a similar nature, uh, on
Maori land-
Mm
... that contributes also to those higher levels of kaitiakitanga conservation.
It is of a similar nature, but it's on a 25-year basis rather than a perpetual
basis.
Thank you.
Thank you. Look, we'll move to Chloe now for primary question.
Um, Minister, you'll remember that you placed an 11th hour
amendment to the Hauraki Gulf Tikopa Moana amendment legislation at
legislation, the marine protected areas.
Yes.
Uh, in which you enabled commercial fishing by protected areas.
This is despite the Greens writing to you and offering in a
committee of the whole our 15 votes to the National Party to not progress with this
change. The National Party now, of course, is campaigning to remove this change,
as would have been achieved had you accepted the Green Party's 15 votes.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, does that indicate that this-
Oh, they did
... carve out for, uh, commercial fishing in high protected
areas in Tikopa Moana was not necessary in the first place?
Well, I'm speaking as the Minister of Conservation in this particular juncture.
Mm.
Uh, and I'm not going to be speaking about the national campaign pledges or
promises.
That's fine.
But what I, what I will say is that, uh, we're very proud of getting progress
on the Tikopa Moana Marine Protection legislation,
and it's not perfect. Uh, there are things that might have been done differently.
But in order to get the try, sometimes you have to go through, through some pretty
nasty phases and nasty battles. We got it over the line.
Uh, we scored, and actually tripling the marine protection in the Hauraki Gulf is
something to be proud of. However, there's also the follow-through.
You can score the try, but you've got to get the conversion.
So, making sure we've got the right enforcement in place, collaborating with
people like NYX Foundation to get $26 million into cleaning up the kina
barrens that populate, uh, different parts of the Hauraki Gulf is something
that we're on right now.
Mm.
Uh, future governments, they might make just different decisions.
Let's see where they get to. But I do welcome the persuasive advocacy of the Green
Party at any time in my ministerial career.
Thank you, Minister. This, um, that was a really interesting answer, particularly
your point about how this was about effectively a coalition government decision,
because I've got here your press release from the Beehive, uh, at the
time that the legislation passed, as you stated and touted.
It's Parliament's decision.
Mm.
Uh, yeah, I, I, I hear you on that. However-
It's not a question
... uh, in the third paragraph here, you say, and I quote, "Today,
National has delivered the biggest new marine protection area in more than
a decade." No other political party is mentioned in that Beehive
PR. So how are you demarcating when you are saying
that in one instance, it's the whole government, in the other instance, it's the
National Party, when in this press release you mention no other political party of
the coalition government?
Chloe, I think that we are, um, scrutinizing the minister today in his
capacity as the minister of the government.
Um-
This, this is a ministerial, this is a ministerial question.
This is the government. No, I understand that, but I'm just weighing what is the
actual question that you're asking.
Well, the question is, how is the minister able to take off his hat
as a National Party minister in some instances when it benefits him to remove
himself from the consequences of his decisions, yet in other instances where he'd
like to take credit as a National Party minister, he can state that he is a
National Party minister?
Well, I am a National Party minister, but I think the question that you, um,
described was contextualized around campaign promises for a future election,
and I think that there's a bit of discernment that we should have in this scrutiny
session about responding as the Minister of Conservation.
Mm. And that's, and he is answering in his capacity as the Minister of
Conservation. Uh-
And his Beehive press release mentions the National Party
... Chloe. So look, we will move to another question. David McLeod has a question.
Thank you.
And then we'll take a break.
Department of Conservation is one of the, um,
entities, Crown entities that has a number of treaty
settlement commitments.
Yes.
In fact, I think it's the de- department that has the most.
It does.
And we've had, uh, in the, the high 80s of number
of iwi that have settled thus far.
Mm.
Um, and-
But not all kaupapa yet.
Right. And, uh, previously-
I understand
... progress has been made in meeting all those commitments.
Yes.
Um, and I'm sure you've got, um, many on the agenda for the-
Right
... the year ahead. Could you perhaps talk to us about, uh, the successes
and the challenges that you have in that space?
Yes. The first thing I'd say is that DOC does have the most, uh,
treaty settlement obligations of any agency, any entity in government.
I think it's about 3,500.
That's right.
Oh, man. Too...
Uh, so, um, it has a huge responsibility and sometimes in some of the most
difficult circumstances, because DOC often, uh, has the title
for wahi tapu and other important places of significance to
our iwi, hapu and whanau. Uh, so it has to be very careful on a number of things.
The second thing is, DOC's on a very deliberate program, uh, and,
uh, is really focused on making sure that those obligations
are met one by one in an enduring manner.
Apart from a little reclassification process, which we've gone through in the last
couple of weeks, for the most part, the number of, uh, commitments that are
either complete or on track are going up, and the number of delivery issues are
coming down on those commitments.
In addition to that, let's not just restrict the Conservation Act and legislation
to treaty, um, settlement arrangements.
There are other, some other responsibilities that we have, and that's why I'm so
enthusiastic around some of the partnerships that we have going, for example, with
Ngati Rangi around the Cycleway, or up in your part of the world around the
restoration and re-, um, reintegration of the, uh, hut up at,
um, the North Egmont face and some of the mahi that the iwi are doing, uh, at
places like Te Whero Kaupuni and around the moment That's absolutely
a motivating factor for me to be proud of being the Minister of Conservation and
other portfolios. Sometimes it involves money.
Sometimes it involves changes to legislation and regulation and tuning
things up. And in the instance of the proposed Conservation Amendment Bill, you'll
know because you're an avid reader of my proposed legislation, there are 87
pages that set out where we propose to meet simple
redress mechanisms in the treaty settlements, and there's a two-year period that
we're going to take in order to get through some of the more complex redress
mechanisms that we can't just capture quickly in the current bill.
Just a supplementary-
Supplementary, yes
... Madam Chair. So I think what's really important is, well, first of all, to
understand that there's sometimes complexity of meeting commitments.
Yes
There's processes, there's other partners at times that are
engaged, etc.
But with the year ahead, the preparation that we're talking about,
there is the resource there to be able to satisfy the
speed of being able to meet the commitments.
We're not frustrating iwi
from being laggard as the Crown. Is this the question?
I'm trying to frame the question.
No, there is sufficient resource, and Sheridan, who's
responsible for those matters, is leading the team that's really dedicated to
working together and getting pragmatic conservation and kaitiakitanga outcomes.
Sometimes, as I mentioned, that involves a bit of hutia and
collaboration. Sometimes it's regulatory or legislative, and sometimes it's just
the willingness to back one another up when it comes to carrying out
those responsibilities. So I'm really
engaged but also energized by some of the challenges that come with
this space. They're not easy, and there's some outstanding settlements, like
Mukaipatia, like Ngapui, like the Tongariro and Whanganui National Parks,
and those are
in front of us, and we need to get through them and move through them in an
enduring way.
Yes.
Thank you. We have one last question from Marama.
Appreciate that, Minister.
I will behave.
I will too, thank you. I will too, because I am genuinely
interested. Minister, you talked
about massive increases of funding from this government.
Appreciate you bearing with me while I just work through some of the figures here.
I have got pulled up from the Department of Conservation website
all of the department budget appropriations,
2026, 2025, 2024.
I have done a real terrible, sloppy back-of-the-envelope
calculation, which shows that even including
IVL funding over the three years of this government,
that in fact the total appropriations to DOC end up with
$87 million in the red. I also did a
sloppy back-of-the-envelope sum for the department
appropriations under a Green lead minister, and I came up with
over six years, over $700 million investment.
So would the minister genuinely break down for me, I think there was a
$2 billion of investment figure thrown around, that I would clink the
glasses with you, Minister-
No. Kombucha glasses
... if that indeed was the case. Absolutely, kombucha.
If that indeed was the case, that his government says
to have invested in the Department of Conservation, would the minister please
provide us with what on earth that figure refers to?
Okay, so let me just get through a couple of things.
The first of all is there have been baseline reductions in DOC's budget.
Yes.
And there's also been some time limits of money that's fallen out.
Jobs for Nature is a great example.
I thought some of the Jobs for Nature projects were wonderful.
Mm.
I thought some of them probably were pretty underwhelming,
but there were a mix of successful and not so successful Jobs for
Nature projects. That was time limited and that came out, that was a huge amount of
money that was committed by the previous government, just to acknowledge that, and
in a difficult time.
The second thing is that there have been some ups, whether or not it's IVL
funding or this year in the mahi around the Nelson Tents,
which is going to be a wonderful outcome-
Yeah
... for the people of Te Tau Iwi to work and actually for the country.
But for the most part, there's been baseline reductions.
And then sometimes, as has happened under previous governments, there's been
investment in specific areas. Like a lot of the beech mast investments over decades
have been one-off or
time limited funding.
Mm.
Okay, so that's what's happened. The third thing I'd say is this, is that I do
think that conservation is a partnered activity in kaitiakitanga
too, across iwi, government, private
landowners, a whole bunch of kids and people who want to see the world become a
better place. And being more efficient of it is really important, but you
do need some massive investment. That's why I absolutely applaud the work of
Neil and Annette Plowman and the NEXT Foundation donating
$150 million of philanthropic funding to
help deliver on the goals. The number that I used earlier on was a number
that the DOC team, 2.3?
2.3 is fine.
I'm on two. Man, if I get to three, I'm out of here.
Was a number that was used to essentially get
a massive shift in the number of threatened and endangered species and ecosystems
to a space where actually it would be enduring. That's about 2.3 per annum.
That's not just a one-off. That's a per annum cost.
No one that I know of has done that, no government.
But I certainly
am
aggressive about trying to preserve DOC's funding
and to find more funding and to find more partners in order to do the things
that we are doing with the conservation portfolio and alongside and with
others. And with that,
,
I'd like to close off, and unless Marama has another
comment.
Just so you agree with us-
Yeah, we have met time, so.
But Nick's been cut.
It's time.
It's a good spot to end your time today.
Yeah.
Thank you very much, Minister.
Okay. I've just got one thing to say-
We appreciate it
... Catherine. I just want to make it out to Penny Nelson.
Kia ora.
Penny's been the doctor and a general and chief-
Kia ora, Penny
... chief executive officer for many years at DOC
And she's done a sterling job under a very difficult minister in the last three
years.
But she's told me that the minister is her favorite.
And, I just want to acknowledge that she's had to deal with a few
reductions in budget.
Yeah.
But also some collaborations and partnerships that I think have really
improved the conservation space.
We are
always naturing, but remain
positive about the things we can do in the space because without nature,
we'll be in outer space. Penny might want to say a few words, but I just wanted to
acknowledge you, Penny, for all your time.
Thank you, Ken and Hilda.
And also acknowledge Peter, who will be soon taking over the role as director
general, Peter Christ. Penny, do you want to have a few words?
Well, thank you. I really appreciate your kind words.
It's been an absolute privilege of my career to be in this role, and
I think conservation always has its challenges.
And what I'm really proud of is what the team has achieved
over the five-year period, is we've done more with
less.
Mm-hmm.
And I think we've had-
Absolutely
... a number of things that we're really setting up that will stand conservation in
good stead into the future. So really appreciate your kind words, and good luck to
all of you for the future. Thank you.
Thank you, Penny.
Thanks, Penny.
All right.
Actually, you're not quite off the hook yet because we do still have 30 minutes
with
the Department of Conservation.
Oh, do we? Oh, okay. Thank you.
You can go, Minister.
Thank you.
We appreciate your time. Thank you.
Now I'm leaving.
And so, we will still have time with
our conservation officials.
So
we will just-
June
... let everyone who needs to leave, leave the room.
And then we will kick into 30 more minutes, will take us till
3:00. So members, this is our opportunity
to ask questions to the Department of Conservation for potentially some of the
areas that we didn't obviously able to traverse with the minister.
So members, we will start with Cameron since he looked so eager
there to ask a question.
Well, I was going to ask of the minister, but if you guys are able
to provide some light, that's...
In
conservation there's trying to achieve an outcome of fixing the concession
process.
Oh.
And I was just hoping you could elaborate on what that looks like
this spoke period.
So I'm happy to start and then I'm going to hand to Steph who's run
the process. So one of the things that
we did in our briefing to an incoming minister,
was we talked about how important it is
for people to be able to have
opportunities on public conservation land, and we felt that our
whole regulatory system was quite broken.
So we suggested that it would be a priority for this term to work
through how we could get that operating better.
And what I'm really proud of is we've
cleared the backlog that we had. We've also
developed some technology investments.
So between July and November of this year, we'll have that
dropping. And what that'll mean is, anyone who's applying to
do something on public conservation land will be able to see how their
permission is tracking. We're meeting all the time frames the
minister's set us. And then the absolute game changer
is when we get the legislative reform through, because what that will
do is it will mean that
40% of the permissions that we have to deal with at the moment
will be able to go through as pre-approved
because they're low impact things.
And we'll be able to focus our effort on the things that are more complicated.
So that's the overall story from my perspective.
What would you add?
I think you've covered it really well.
I'd just add,
there's over 200 different types of activities that we'll have permits or
licenses or concessions for.
And at our peak, as Penny said, there were around 1,300 sitting in the system.
We're aiming to have them sit between 300 and 400 at the moment because they all
take a bit of a process. Once we get the IT and the legislation through,
we'll reassess that number. But we used to make about
170 decisions a month, and we now make about 290 decisions a
month. So the other thing I'd say is just an enormous thanks to people from right
across the organization, because there's a huge team that's got behind
really speeding up that process.
Okay. There is one small sub.
Yeah.
Just so concession holders or license or permit holders, whatever
they happen to be,
is this new process going to
enable feedback or things to do with a concession, say mapping of
boundaries or... Is there going to be a way for things to happen
during the term of that concession period?
Not just at the application approval, but during the time.
So we get a lot of feedback from concessionaires at the moment.
I think it's been
one of the things that I've seen really shift under Steph's
leadership, is we're having discussions
around what concessionaires' business models are.
Quite open feedback about what they're finding difficult.
And a lot of that, we're moving into an account management system, so we
address a lot of those things. I was really delighted when the minister and I rang
our top 50 concessionaires over the Christmas period.
It was a lot less noisy than the phone calls we were having 12 months
previously. So I think those feedback loops are working really well.
And I'd encourage you, if there's anyone you're hearing from, just send it our way.
Yeah. I do. And just to be clear, top 50 on size, capacity, what was the
top 50?
Like you said, we called top 50 over the Christmas period.
Yeah.
Top 50.
So a lot of those were some of the big tourism provider, like some of those-
So by revenue
... by scale, quite often, or the number of concessions they might hold with us.
I see.
All of them matter to us, everyone that we work with.
But these were some of the ones that had been sitting in the system for a while as
well, that we'd been working our way through.
And then the other thing that the IT will enable is-
People who are in a process or hold a bunch of concessions can go in and
have a look at their portfolio, for want of a better word, and see where it's
tracking. And then also we're building an iwi portal, so iwi can go in,
because we consult with iwi on a lot of these decisions.
They get a lot of emails and traffic from us.
They can actually go into a portal now and see what's in their backyard and what
they're interested in as well. So it'll speed up the process for our people, for
our treaty partners, and for applicants as well.
Thank you. Look, we'll go to Priyanka now.
Thank you. I just had some questions around marine spatial
planning and what work is being undertaken
in that space.
Been reading some of the research that EDS has put out in terms of some of
the gaps when it comes to
baseline ecological data sets and some of the
monitoring stuff as well. So just looking to get a-
So I'll start, and then I'll hand to Steph.
Sure.
One of the things that I've been most excited about in my
term is the work that's been done in
the Hauraki Gulf. So getting that work through, which was a long-term
spatial planning process, I think has provided a different model
of getting marine protection. And I think
now that we know that works, I think it could be rolled out across a number of
different parts of the country. And one of the things that we've had some of
our clever scientists doing in DOC over the last three years
is they've been working closely with
councils and Crown research institutes to put all the data together
and work through where might you go next for marine protection.
So it's a bit like a marine invest into like
what we've done in
bio invest. So I think some really good quality work
has been done on that. We'd be delighted to take you through that at some
stage if you were interested, and I think it's
absolutely fundamental when you think about most of New Zealand's
really precious biodiversity is in marine areas, and we're seeing the
ocean heating up. I think we need to look at ways that we
can get into more marine protection, and I think that work will help.
That's all I'd say, really. I think it's just there's been a lot of that kind of
mapping and knowledge done in our terrestrial landscapes, and we're just trying to
get a better picture of where our higher priority areas are for marine biodiversity
as well, and partnering with a lot of others to do it.
So that's great to hear because absolutely
agree, and I do think that needs to be a focus
going forward. So part of what we hear is just
the lack of legislative tools to be able to
put those protections. So this is mapping out where the protections should
go, and then there's the other bits that we've heard during submissions
on the Hauraki Gulf Marine Protection Bill, that all we've really got
is the Marine Reserves Act that's like the highest
protection, and we don't have a basket of tools that we can use for
other protection areas. So the HBAs and the SBAs.
Would there be a requirement for legislation around
to be able to implement the work that you're doing?
So I think I'll pass to Brian, he's giving me a look.
But anyway, I might pass to Brian.
So there's a number of tools,
including in the fisheries management system too, around spatial closures and
other tools that you can use in the fisheries area, as well as the tools
that
we have. And some of them do take quite some time.
So that work will be useful to whether if you're looking at how
you want to better protect hoiho, then MPI might have an interest in
that as well when they're thinking about some decisions they're making.
So yes, it will be useful if you're looking at some of our current
tools. It'll be useful for councils, for MPI, and others.
I guess I would say any future legislative decisions would be
a decision for government to make around how those tools work.
I might just have a go at rephrasing that.
So if we wanted to replicate what's been done in the
Hauraki Gulf, which was new, in terms of the
types of protections. If we wanted to replicate in other parts of
the country,
can we do it now without legislation?
Well, we'd follow the standard processes that we take to put any type of
marine protection in place, just like we have for Seump and
Hauraki. I
just don't think we've had a forward-looking plan of where we would think some of
the best places, if you wanted to get a good
representation of different ecosystem types around New
Zealand. That's how we think about our land management role in the department.
So we try and cover enough of all the different ecosystems that we need to cover to
have good representation. This is trying to lean us more to forward
planning with a lot of other partners because we don't have all the tools
ourselves,
but how you might think about that into the future.
So it's kind of an enabling thing, and then you'd have to apply the current
legislation.
And then you figure out whether you have the tools to protect it or not.
Yeah.
Okay.
So what I'd add is
all conservation legislation is really out of date.
Yeah.
So we're starting with the Conservation Act.
I think we have got huge opportunity over the coming
years to update all of our conservation legislation
across land, water, and marine.
Yeah.
And we would be very happy to provide
advice on how we think the sequence of that could work to have the greatest impact.
Great.
Yeah, I'll echo that. So we're actually reforming the youngest piece of our
legislation, which is 1987.
We've got legislation that dates back, I'd politely suggest our
legislation's older than most people in this room.
Mm-hmm.
So 1953 for the Wildlife Act, for example.
Yeah.
So let's leave the room.
Just grapes in, yeah. So I think
the marine area is one where, as part of our briefing to an incoming minister, we
would think pretty carefully
about both the land and also the marine legislative
environment, and the coherence of that as well.
Good. Can I just ask-
Just one more thing
No, just through you, to the advice that Penny
mentioned, can we get that through to the select committee?
Yes.
That's all.
We can follow up on that.
Yes.
Lan.
Just a quick supplementary on the information in the marine
environment.
It was reported recently at the Convention on Biological
Diversity that New Zealand reported around 20% of
its marine environment is protected, despite apparently the figure
being only 0.45% of the
ocean being highly protected. And there was
advice from officials that warned that that
0.45 figure may "draw attention to New
Zealand's current lack of a strategic plan for further protection
measures." What is DOC's role like?
Did DOC have a role in that advice, and was that your
warning, or is that some other department?
And what is DOC's role in terms of progressing
our ocean protection?
So we absolutely have a role, and one of the things that we're
looking to do, and we're doing a lot of work on, in terms of a briefing
to our incoming minister, whoever that is
following the election, is we think it's absolutely
critical there's an increased focus on the marine environment because of
all the precious biodiversity that's there.
And we'll be providing really clear advice about
where we think the areas are to focus, that you get the greatest
impact.
Okay. So was DOC involved in that Convention on
Biological Diversity?
That's right. So,
ourselves, MPI, others pulled together to put advice forward.
I'd have to look at that to give you an exact answer.
Okay.
But in looking at how we-- There's lots of views on how
you might count levels of protection, and so we looked at
the Convention on Biological Diversity
guidance, the IUCN Marine Protection Area guidelines, and our
domestic policy, and our views on the level of protection
different things give. The 0.45% is that absolute
protection in a marine reserve, no take at all.
And then some of the other levels of protection, where you might have had a
benthic protected area in a place where nothing's happened for 10 years, or it
might not be fishing depth or whatever, to area and spatial
restrictions, or just some restrictions that are just for
some fishing types and so forth. So it was a way of saying,
overall, there's 20% level of a
type of protection. The absolute marine reserve type stuff is
that low number.
Thank you.
I was keen to actually ask a question around
BioInvest, because I know we spoke about it last time, and
I know it's kind of progressing and being implemented.
And I was actually out with some DOC staff just the other day, and
they weren't actually that aware of the tool and the system.
So I just wondered whether it was kind of being implemented in certain geographical
areas and how things were going with it, because I know it's
very good.
Yeah.
Just really interested to get an update on it.
Yeah. So great question. And sometimes we won't
use the jargon that we might use here-
Yes
... with our frontline staff. So what we've done is, and I'm
really proud of this, because when I started at DOC,
if you'd asked what our biodiversity priorities were, I couldn't answer it,
and we didn't have absolute alignment
between where you get the highest value impact and what was
happening on the ground, and we now have that.
So what we've done is between
Steph's team and Henry, who runs our regional operations, we've done a
lot of work to work through what are those priorities through
BioInvest, and every single region now has a
five-year plan that lays out what the priorities are for
biodiversity, visitor, and heritage.
They've got the investment against it and so what people will be
talking about is what those priority
species or ecosystems are or what they're doing for threat
management. Rather than talking about BioInvest, they talk about what the work
is. And every single regional director for their region
now has a dashboard which will show them what they're doing in terms
of species management, what they're doing in terms of ecosystem management, what
they're doing in terms of pest control, and where there's research in their area.
And they can see it on a dashboard.
Mm. Amazing.
It's incredible.
Yeah.
What have I missed?
No, Ryan just had a sup on that.
Yeah, just really interested in that tool.
Mm.
Does it change? Like if 12 massive species grows or
a pest species, is it an evolving tool?
Absolutely. And what it also enables them to do is if you,
what happens if you dialed up pest control versus weed
control? What would happen? So,
really useful. And I think
also, in terms of a leadership team, so you'll have seen the
wedge that we've got in terms of,
and the minister talked about it. We can see whether we're preventing
losses or getting to really thriving nature, and
it also gives us a sense of what's the
gap that we've got in terms of what we're trying to achieve, and also,
what are the critical actions that will make the biggest difference.
So for example, for the 900
threatened species and ecosystems at the moment that we've got that need
urgent intervention, we've got a 207 million gap per annum,
and the critical things that we would need to direct that to are more
animal pest control,
more weed control, more biosecurity measures to protect islands,
and urgent interventions on a range of species.
So it gives us that, and so that'll help
us as we,
touch wood, get that legislation through and have access charging.
We'll know what to put it to. With those partnerships that we're trying to develop,
we can talk to people about what more we need.
Thank you. You've spawned two more questions for me.
One was, is it open source, transparent, collaborative, that tool?
Do you share it with other NGOs, et cetera?
Second question,
POSI. Was that something... I can't remember where DOC
sat around that. Obviously, very collaborative.
Oh, okay.
Oh, interesting. Yeah.
But just any thoughts on that?
So on your first one, at the moment, we've been building BioInvest that leads into
our own planning system and our work.
We've been talking to some councils about trialing it with them.
It sort of sits as one of the priorities under the biodiversity strategy
implementation plan about how you get a better picture across-
Mm
... whether it's QE2 councils, Maori landowners around our biodiversity.
In terms of putting it online, eventually we want to think about
what that looks like. We wouldn't want to point everyone to where every special
thing is, because we do have smugglers and other things in this country that want
to know where our pretty geckos and stuff like that are.
Mm.
So we're just working through how we would use it.
And so that's kind of a next phase that we'd look at.
In terms of herds of special interest,
we're the organization, of course, that supports the Minister of Hunting and
Fishing. We've been working with the Game Animal
Council, SEKA Foundation, Wāpiti Foundation to do
the herd management plans. And we, of course, advise the
minister through the statutory process that he's following at the moment. So, yeah.
Right. Thank you. Can I-
Thank you
... sup on that?
A supplementary from the-
On the POSI stuff.
Yes.
Is that all right?
Yeah.
Thank you.
With my interactions with some of the hunting community, there seems to be a lack
of
trust in dealing with DOC. I get that
feedback from them. What's your view?
Got any comment on that?
So what I've seen over my time in DOC is, I
think Ben Reddicks, who's in the back row-
Yeah
... has done a phenomenal job
engaging with the hunting sector.
What I hear from most of the hunting sector that talks to me is they
feel like
that trust has really improved
over the last five years, particularly as we trial things in the
Roheines.
The goat competition.
Mm.
Who doesn't love the goat competition?
Goats.
Yeah.
I like that answer.
It's a goat. Yeah, the goat.
So look, there's always work to be done, but I think
that has really developed over time.
Mm-hmm.
And if anyone's talking to you about that, send them Ben Reddicks'
way, and he'll be very keen to work it through.
Mm. Okay.
The other thing I'd just add to that is, there are a lot of values we're trying to
balance because we are also trying to protect biodiversity, enable
people to have recreation and hunting opportunities.
So,
sometimes you won't always be pleasing everybody to the extent of
what's happening across those different values, I guess.
Yeah. Thank you.
David.
Yeah.
Thank you. I'd like to talk about cultural heritage sites and-
Yes
... obviously the significant DOC
estate and the fact that I think there's an estimated 15,000 of them.
Last year you had about 4% of them under management.
You've got a goal of 10.
Yeah.
So a few questions. How's your progress with regards to that?
What's your timeframe for reaching the 10%?
And also, how do you prioritize a site-
Yeah
... to be able to put under management amongst those?
Yeah, and I'm going to throw the wonderful Kat Wilson in the hot seat, who is our
Director of Heritage and Visitors, who will be excited that you've asked about
heritage.
And so we've actually
had some additional funding through a previous budget where we
did a whole lot of work to look across all of our heritage assets to
really get a sense of their condition and off the back of that.
So while we've built BioInvest, which we've talked about a lot, we've built the
same function for our heritage assets, and then we worked
through
what are the ones that we really need to prioritize over the next few...
Well, you'll know about Tohu Whenua sites as well, of course.
They are really important to us.
And our heritage work is where we do a lot of work with Mana Whenua because a lot
of sites are of great significance on conservation land.
So the bit I can't answer is timelines to get to
10%, but-
Look forward to the mic and I can-
You can jump up.
And I don't think I can answer that either.
But what I can say is that, with the budget funding that we
had from 2022, we've done a significant amount of
work to really increase the work going on in the regions,
and also to get that database, as Steph said,
so similar to BioInvest, where we understand what it is
that we've got. Because it's
a massive portfolio across the country,
ranging from large buildings like Mansion House.
You know of the Chateau as well, obviously, as a heritage building.
Mm.
But also, archaeological sites or, um-
Got a buyer?
Yeah.
I know one.
So, uh-
Yeah, a lot of work going on and similar to BioInvest, it's sort of the first time
that we've had a really good picture of all of the things that we've got, and we're
able to target. It's similarly irreversible
loss is what we're trying to mitigate.
Mm.
So where we know there are climate impacts likely or
things are degrading over time, we can focus our energy in those places.
Thank you.
Thank you. Look, we've got time for one last question, so we'll go to Lan.
Thank you, Chair.
First and last.
So I just wanted to get clear, I caught the end of
that last hearing, and the minister seemed a bit concerned about the funding,
and so it'd be good for the committee to just clarify where the sort of
shortfalls are. So is it correct that
DOC's baseline has been cut by about
194 million, and then that leaves a further
197 million in cost pressures unmet?
Mm-hmm.
So is that roughly $400 million funding
shortfall over the next four years?
So in terms of, so Budget 26, we've had
31.7 million that comes out over
a four-year period. If you then look at the
Baseline reductions we've had from budget '24, that's
149.7 million
over a four-year period. And then if you look at other cost pressures, so that's
from things like
inflation, depreciation, salaries, et cetera,
that's 197.3 million. So I think when you look
at those numbers cumulatively, you can see why
it's so critical that we're using every single lever we've got to increase
revenue to go back into conservation, whether that be cost
recovery for our concessions,
increasing our partnerships, really getting that legislative reform
through so we get that access charging. It's really critical.
And on the legislative reform,
is the conservation purpose
at risk under the changes in the legislation?
No, it's not. Conservation remains the
primary purpose of the legislation.
So how is that when there's no hierarchy, though, that it's
removing the hierarchy, as far as I understand it?
I don't think it is. So
let me just find
quick notes here.
So a couple of points, I guess. You would've seen we're doing proactive
release of most of the Cabinet material as we go through, and I would say
that that material shows that the minister's intent throughout
is and was to keep conservation as the primary purpose of the act.
Our view is that
that purpose statement change does not empower decisions to
approve economic development on public conservation land where that would
still be or would be inconsistent
with the statutory purpose for which the land is held.
So you still need to read that statutory purpose for which the land is held in the
decision-making process.
So the statutory purpose of each land title, essentially-
Of the classifications
... has its own-
Of the classifications of land, that's right
... conservation purpose-
Yeah
... different to that of the Conservation Act itself.
Is that what you're saying?
So when we read the Conservation Act, and when we apply the
concessions process, concessions, and I'm speaking
on Steph's territory here,
such as leadership,
the concessions can't be granted for activities that are inconsistent for
the purposes for which that land is held, and that still remains under the reforms.
And you still assess ecological and other values of that land
in making that decision.
Yeah.
Look, thank you.
We're going to have to wrap it up there.
Look, I'd just like to echo that
of your time and your time in front of our committee on
many occasion and all the work that you've done.
Should be really proud of a lot of those initiatives that have been brought
through. So thank you very much indeed.
Thank you.
Appreciate your time, and appreciate everyone's time today. So thank you.
You're good.
What's that?
Yeah, we have one more-
So members, we have a, uh-
15 minutes
... 15 minute